[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast today we're joined by
Michael aor how are you doing today
Michael I'm doing great Dylan how about
you thanks for having me yeah I'm doing
excited super psyched to chat with with
you on this call I normally would say
what the title is of the company work
for but you guys just went through a
rebranding so can you tell us uh what
your title is and and the new company
you're working for yeah I'm I'm the CEO
of of uh uh Grove infrastructure uh
formerly known as pocket Network Inc
which as I'm sure you can imagine uh can
can get confusing having pocket Network
pocket Network Inc pocket Network
Foundation pocket Network Dow so as uh
the protocol grew it felt very prudent
for us to uh separate the actual company
from the the protocol itself perfect
yeah I I work in a a blockchain
ecosystem myself that has this uh bated
sort of three-headed monster that leads
the direction of of the ecosystem so
super psyched to to dig into that in a
little bit but I kind of want to jump
into the deep end here and I was
watching one of your previous podcasts
where you mentioned that in 2017 during
the crazy Ico boom that 80% of all the
activity went through one server
essentially so you brought up this
really philosophical kind of question
that got my gears rolling and that if we
have 80% of the activity going through
like a single server then that makes the
opportunity for a nation state attack on
a network to kind of be possible so to
jump off into our conversation how do
these decentralized systems were
building really compete against that
because the nation state is the singular
entity that has this all encompassing
power and we're just a hodg podge of
peer-to-peer networks so from your
perspective what is the ways in which
these decentralized networks can
amalgamate work together and Empower one
another to prevent a sort of nation
state attack in that sort of scenario
yeah yeah you're not kidding you're
really jumping off the off the deep end
here yeah so um I think there there's
two pieces this there's there's kind of
the supply and and the demand um and in
a uh traditional context whether it's
you know Amazon web services or
something like that um Amazon owns both
the supply and the demand of every piece
of the stack right um they they they
host the infrastructure and they also uh
have different startups and users and so
and developers uh building on Amazon web
services so uh for me it's about
separating those two things and uh uh
creating the ability for people that
basically build businesses on both sides
of it uh and if you have a large enough
uh Market that is global you can then
actually begin to to to fight against um
you know any individual nation state
attack for example so as to use pocket
Network as an example we've got a a
supply site that's uh quite Global where
we're hosted in where we have people
running nodes in in in 20 plus countries
and we're in the part of the evolution
to have the same thing happen uh in the
demand side and and that's where I think
real magic comes in because you know we
have Grove here which Builds on pocket
Network and is offering RPC Service as a
us-based company but by being able to uh
give the opportunity and enable others
to build our same business uh around the
globe with their own uh uh take on it
their own technology whatever it is you
then have created a system that uh you
know is is uh Supra National or or above
the jurisdictions of just the United
States for example awesome thanks how
did you how did you get to this point
Point what was your kind of career
trajectory since studying in Florida and
then ending up here because you know 10
years ago this this wasn't a field and
now 10 years later we're building not
just blockchain networks but like
services for blockchain networks and now
as you just mentioned supply and demand
side Services as well so maybe just kind
of give us like the short umbrella
overview of what your time has been like
since you graduated from USF yeah yeah
well uh it took me a little bit longer
to graduate about eight years um took me
took me a while to to to find my way but
uh throughout my time at USF I worked at
um some credit unions uh here in Tampa
uh selling loans and sell thousands of
credit reports you see how messed up the
financial system can be for some reason
and that was in 2011 and 2012 and uh I I
would say that uh sufficiently
radicalized me for when I read a Bitcoin
article on on Wired Magazine in in in
2013 uh ended up on the subreddit read
the white paper uh having you know not
being born in this country having used
Western Union before I kind of
understood it pretty pretty quickly uh
and just kind of kind of drank the
Kool-Aid from from there uh in 2013 uh
while I was at USF uh I I was studying
International Studies I wanted to be a
diplomat at one point and throughout
that time uh learned to code for for iOS
I had already been coding for about a
year before I graduated and then uh
started to to to professionally uh be an
iOS Developer for for a few years before
I met my startup uh co-founders or my my
pocket co-founders in uh Sarasota
Florida back in 2015 2016 time frame we
were speaking before we hit the record
button uh I myself am a former Floridian
um and so one of the things I really
like uh about Colorado you might have
been to eth Denver maybe not but we have
this really robust blockchain Community
here and you've actually been really
active in the Tampa Bay St Pete Bay Area
um in the local blockchain and crypto
Community there so what is just like the
vibe there what's the scene like there
are you working around a bunch of
Builders are there Founders there what's
the type of interest level for your
local community yeah it's not quite as
uh Builder focused as like say New York
or or Denver in some cases but uh it's
actually gotten a lot better over the
years or at least not better is not
necessarily the right word but uh it's
definitely evolved over the last few
years um you know shout out to to gab
and Rosa for for running the Bitcoin
Meetup every other Wednesday since 2013
uh back then it was four or five of us
you'd have a couple uh older Floridians
come in and say what is this Bitcoin
thing and then you'd start to have the
uh the cloud miners uh uh come in and
try to sell their their stuff which I
you ironically you know pocket in some
respects is running infrastructure in a
different kind of a cloud um and it's
really evolved over the last few years
um I used to run the the Tampa Bay
blockchain developer Meetup when we were
first starting pocket and and was I was
learning solidity and um and and that
started to build a few people and now I
went to meet up um earlier this year and
I say it was like 50% Builders and and
50% U people who are just interested in
the space um want to understand more and
learn more uh uh so I think it's a
pretty it's a pretty healthy mix which
is which is pretty cool and they still
to this day host it uh host this Meetup
um some times mostly virtually now it's
once a month in person but used to be
every every other week in person yeah I
was just going to say before cutting you
off um it's kind of really refreshing
right now to be this is probably your
third or fourth bull bear cycle but it's
really refreshing to kind of be in the
the grips of 2023 which is a little more
existential than the
2018 uh bear we have um at a high level
a high National policy level we're
starting to talk about blockchain and
crypto and all this um so you're getting
the sense that there's folks who are
kind of like unfazed by this you're
starting to see builders kind of come
out the woodwork yeah absolutely I mean
that's still the case I mean if you were
in Denver or or at CC I think the energy
is is super clear um I mean we do have
two major major headwinds um obviously
the the regulatory uh situation and also
really this is the first time uh crypto
has been an environment where money
isn't free so I think we're we're we're
kind of figuring out how to how to
Grapple that but at the end of the day I
mean if you go to any one of these um uh
more developer focused conferences
you're seeing more and more people
building um every single day and more
interesting things being built in hack
aounds more professional things and and
uh for me that's just incredibly
inspiring and exciting that's just it's
always been the case it's just what you
you know pric isn't always an indicator
of of of the activity and and
historically uh uh we' consistently seen
that uh increase over
time yeah and of course like we're
seeing magnificent numbers of the of the
the national debt kind of going up by
hundreds of billions of days a day now
so I guess kind of that 2013 version of
you that first stumbled on bitcoin who
had these experiences of um sending
money to to family and friends abroad
maybe maybe that Rings a little bit more
true or continues to ring a little true
to you today that that kind of rhyme and
reason for why Bitcoin exists but
something that I'm also really
interested in is is while you were
learning iOS is this when your kind of
interest in solidity Peak what made you
want to start building on ethereum when
you first learned that you could code
smart contracts yeah you know it was
actually after the Dow hack when I first
tried out ethereum um actually so this
was uh had to have been fall 2016 um
after after the Dow hack and I just
remember reading about it going to
ethereum subreddit and and seeing
solidity I was pretty pretty neat deep
in in in kind of the iOS thing and I was
like oh I can try to write a smart
contract and uh there's only been a
couple of times that uh my mind has been
just truly just blown when I write some
kind of software when I've written some
software in in in the past and the first
time was the first time I made a https
connection where I was actually pulled
data in and showed it to the screen I
was just like wow this is barely hanging
by a thread and this is if this is how
the internet works you know this is that
was just a very kind of mind-blowing
moment and the second one was really the
first uh smart contract uh deployed
because you know I deployed the software
and like I knew no one could mess with
it and and having you know used like the
Twitter API the Facebook API the Google
API and literally getting kind of rug
pulled by then changing it and I was
having to scramble to adjust something
or fix something uh just the idea that
you know you could just change this text
because I just allowed it and no one
else can do anything about it was just
uh another one of those kind of
mindblowing moments and that's really
when you know my co-founders and I
really started uh thinking about what to
do and what to build um in the space
yeah so before we kind of jump into
pocket Network and Grove and the pocket
Network Foundation um a lot of our
audience they're not like this isn't the
first time they're hearing about Bitcoin
or ethereum or or even various different
blockchains or
cryptocurrencies um but granted that you
know you kind of are in the weeds and
you're a builder can we just like go
over just a really simple term and just
kind of eli5 what RPC nodes are yeah um
the best way I can describe it is uh
every time you uh open up a wallet um
either on your phone or your computer
and you see the little loading screen
before you see uh uh uh your balance um
and then all of a sudden you see you
have like five eth on your on your
metamask wallet for example that data
comes from a full note and that comes
from services like pocket uh what pocket
is set out to build um so at the end of
the day uh uh really what what we do is
is is allow developers to read and write
data for their users so when you make a
transaction or when you're seeing you
know your balance on your wallet that
literally just comes from services like
ours I'm not sure if it's the case today
but last year you guys were churning
through quite a large amount of traffic
on a daily basis so what is the kind of
level of use and activity that you're
seeing with pocket Network today yeah we
stayed pretty stable um you know
generally in the 1 to two billion Mark
uh we grew very quickly from and for
context you know this is still a drop in
the bucket I think I would I would
estimate there to be somewhere between
100 and 200 billion daily RPC requests a
day that are actually paid for that you
know developers need you know there's I
think there's a bunch of other kind of
free traffic but let's call it just the
the world of which you know people
actually pay for and and and need it
really really deeply need it um so we're
doing you know one to two billion of
that you know one 100 to to 200 billion
today but really we um we built out the
network we launched it in 2020 and uh
really it was kind of the first network
of its kind and that first year we
really spent just kind of fixing things
you know we forked tenderman we had a
bunch of issues scaling the network on
the supply side uh and then we had to
figure out okay we have all these nodes
like how do we do this quality of
service thing how do we make sure that
you know a developer can get their their
their data or the user can get their
data in a meaningful amount of time
because if you're going to wait 5
seconds for your wallet balance to use
you're going to be like screw this I
don't want to use this this wallet or
this app or whatever it might be right
um so that was when uh uh in the second
year of pocket uh is when we really kind
of figured that out the protocol was
stable we got to a reasonable uh uh
level of latency and and quality of
service and I said reasonable this is
about 500 milliseconds or or half a
second and we were doing maybe like five
or 10 million requests a day at the time
so we just said screw it let's open the
floodgates and let's see how far this
can scale and our assumption was that
the more scale we would get the more we
would understand the edge cases and the
problems and therefore improve the
quality of service as we went so yeah we
went from about 10 million requests to
over a billion in in about uh uh 10
months and we were like okay this is uh
this works the whole thing actually
works at scale at a meaningful scale um
and that's really what led us to to
Grove and where we are today but that
was a really uh fun and and exciting
time because I mean I still wake up
today and I I see pocket Network and I'm
just like holy this thing is like
coordinating infrastructure on a global
scale without taking any rent uh uh and
picking the the nodes and and and and
sending the traffic and it's just uh
it's really a a mind-blowing thing and
and you know a billion of anything is a
lot and and for us to be able to to to
get to this scale uh has just been uh
really really incredible and and really
since then once we got to that level uh
it's been like okay one this is costing
us a lot of money on infrastructure to
you know we've got uh uh some some some
decent amount of um some awareness now
let's go in kind of the next the next
phase where it's like let's prove out
the business uh so that not only us can
do it but many many others can do it
which is you know calls back to what we
were talking about um at the very
beginning of of this call yeah so
congratulations on moving fast and not
breaking things lots of things lot lots
of things broke let's be clear lots of
things
broke what are the what are the networks
that uh pocket Network supports
integrates with I noticed you meant you
mentioned tenderman but you're also
talking about ethereum so is this a like
a multi-chain sort of network um what
does it look like when a brand new chain
let let's say a new um app chain from
the cosmos ecosystem wants to integrate
with pocket Network what does that look
like yeah you know it's more of a
coordination problem it's more like hey
you know there's there's a user or a
customer who's like hey you know I need
um OS for example um and then we'll go
and say hey okay we can support you
forever OS um as kind of the main kind
of Gateway or portal provider uh and say
Hey you know let's do this we say it's
so for us it's more of a coordination
problem so we put out kind of the bat
signal to the supply side of the network
say hey we're going to uh uh launch OS
and whitelist it on the protocol so that
you can get paid uh because you can list
any chain but you have to get Whit
listed on the protocol uh uh as a chain
ID uh to actually receive Pock for
serving the traffic uh and then you know
let's say by you know by Halloween uh
because we're we're here in October but
you know by Halloween day we're gonna
which is a bad idea to launch a chain on
Halloween but either way uh we're going
to launch fos on the state that gives
the node Runners uh enough time to say
hey spin up their infrastructure if they
want to support it and then we go ahead
and send some tests and and and
effectively launch it on that day um so
it's it's and the difference there from
kind of a centralized company is that
they own the entire stack and have to
maintain and update a lot more software
uh uh as one single monolithic
organization than what we do as a very
much more Nimble small kind of Gateway
company right you can kind of think of
Grove as more of like the Uber for nodes
if you will uh where we don't own or
control any of the supply but we help
manage the demand side there cool and I
think I'm I'm following uh with where
you're going with this but I just want
to clarify can you just Eli 5 what you
mean when you're talking about with RPC
node infrastructure what do you mean by
supply side and demand side yeah so uh I
view uh supply and demand as the supply
cider that people actually running the
noes themselves um so this is um uh
we've got you know dozens of different
folks that are running you know many
many different nodes for many CH chains
that we support as as pocket which is
over over 40 today and then for me the
demand side are the developers who need
access to that nodes um so so Grove
provides kind of this portal so that
developers could three click three
clicks get an end point and then put
that in their application and just start
building right uh and it's our job uh
not just this grow but eventually many
other uh uh uh providers on top of the
network to drive that demand traffic to
the supply side or the node Runners of
the network uh with you know as best
quality of service and and and
everything that goes on with that
perfect so you guys launched in 2020
this is like defi summer like evm is
still mostly just ethereum like rollups
are years away maybe people are starting
to talk about Avalanche and Cosmos so
during the tenure of pocket Network you
guys have had to kind of like adapt to
these new alt l1s that kind of arose in
popularity you had to adapt to these um
l2s that also kind of uh became more and
more used over the past few years so as
you guys are building this
infrastructure for decentralized
networks what was it like with this
onslaught of these new of the rise in
these new chains and also having to like
keep up with with adding support to
pocket Network as like more and more not
ethereum chains became popular yeah well
you know I've I've always believed uh
that we're going to live in a world with
with tens of thousands maybe maybe even
hundreds of thousands of of blockchains
so we designed Pockets such that it
would be very easy to add these chains
and at the end of the day we want to go
where the RPC traffic is and where which
means where the developers are
effectively right so that first year we
just supported ethereum in pocket
um and we made the explicit decision to
um uh add as many chains as possible um
so to give you an example um uh what
really uh helped uh catalyze our growth
back then was you know we decided to add
a Harmony uh Harmony as a as a
blockchain um uh in in 2021 and they had
an app called called defi Kingdom start
to just absolutely explode on the
harmony chain and we already supported
them then there was a moment in time
when the kind of foundation uh operated
RPC was having issues or went down and
all that traffic ended up settling on on
pocket right so for us it's always been
you know kind of skating where the puck
is going in the sense of trying to
support these chains and growing with
them especially as their ecosystems grow
and and uh really trying to to to kind
of Leverage um Pockets unique uh unique
properties and and help these
communities and and and these
blockchains grow as well yeah that's
really cool to just kind of be there and
ready for when those kind of parabolic
movements happen um so how does pocket
network uh earn earn fees earn Revenue
earn an income is it in the pocket token
um are you earning tokens on these
various different networks that you guys
are supporting what does that kind of
economic model look like yeah um so so
forgetting about the the networks and
the customers and stuff for a second um
pocket is a pocket network is um a a
mint burn and stake model so rather than
transferring value uh direct uh through
via you know fees or state channels or
something like that um what we do is we
have uh the demand side in our case
we're you we're facilitating all of that
we buy and um then burn Pock uh which
results in minting uh uh what doesn't
result in minting every time someone
creates an RPC request that results in a
mint on the supply side and eventually
once we get to um an equilibrium you'll
have the uh uh emissions or the total
Supply in effect be uh be flat pocket
meaning the the burning will be
equivalent to the amount of Pock being
emitted by the supply side um uh so so
so so what we do is we really uh uh uh
transfer this value uh uh by by buying
and burning pocked uh and then on the
other side the supply side and we we we
just you know from first principles we
just found that this was a far more
efficient way for us to transfer that
value then kind of incurring this this
cost of coordination um where you know
know if you think about a network of a
thousand validators and you're sending
fees constantly and they're constantly
coming in consensus around those fees
that gets really expensive very quickly
um and if you think about just the
inertia of just um a one-time stake that
slowly gets burned and then they are
then emitting uh or or minting this Pock
in in in batches basically uh that's a
much more efficient way to to Really
transfer that value which is why we we
landed on this model so there's uh three
kind
of entities that are in the pocket
well charging the direction of the the
pocket ecosystem so you have Grove you
have the pocket Network Foundation and
then you also have uh the Dow so can you
just kind of uh I have a few questions
for each of them but can you just kind
of like elevator pitch what are the
three entities what are they responsible
for and then we can kind of go go from
there yeah yeah so so just to sets of
context uh blockchains uh many
blockchains in my opinion um if you draw
a triangle between um a government a
corporation and a religion a blockchain
just is is is right in the middle uh
right right in the middle and um we
intentionally designed um the network
and and the governance and everything
around it uh uh such that it kind of uh
reflected what we feel like a new
institution or a new country um governed
by its users uh would look like right
and definitely took um inspiration from
folks like Dash who I think were
probably the first to actually have a
foundation actually governed by its
Master nodes back in the day um but we
you know kind of uh mapped it so that it
fit pocket use case but we basically
have uh the development company uh which
is the core maintainers of the protocol
which is growth right uh forly known as
pocket networking um we've shifted from
being a company that is uh kind of
building out this network that we built
without the network that we launched uh
to now shifting into building the
business on top of the network and
showing others how to do it as well um
and with that change and let's call it
incentives uh it's really critical to
have a um a credibly neutral Steward of
the protocol and facilitator of the
protocol itself which is where the
foundation comes in um the foundation
comes in um uh because the world doesn't
know how to really work with a dow you
know if you go to some corporation uh or
whoever it is you want to throw
conference whatever it is um or you want
to hire someone from the Dow uh uh that
that infrastructure really wasn't there
to to uh to begin with so um we made
sure we had this Foundation uh that was
able to be nimble enough to make
decisions and have the capital to be
able to um facilitate and allocate to
whatever it is that is to the benefit of
the network uh uh purely as as um as as
that kind of an entity basically and the
important part here learning from things
like tasos and and and and and and and
some others that have had some issues
with like their foundations and
development companies and this sort of
thing it was really important for us to
have the pocket Dow actually be able to
have um oversight and control over the
foundation's directors um so what we did
is we actually uh uh created this
foundation in the Cayman Islands and we
chose the Cayman Islands because they
had the flexibility to say in the actual
creation documents the pocket Dow can
hire and fire the foundation directors
uh via vote uh kind of taking that
metaphor from from countries um uh
especially uh uh we designed uh the
pocket Dow which is literally anyone in
the pocket ecosystem whether you're a
node Runner demand Community member
doesn't matter uh to be able to claim a
vote uh uh to vote on uh the protocols
matters right so so the pocket D really
votes on on three main things uh uh the
monetary policy uh uh protocol upgrades
and um uh the treasury uh so so we have
a certain amount of Pock that gets uh
emitted that goes into the pocket
treasury um and the Dow basically
governs and manages all that on top of
making sure that the foundation are good
actors and are doing things you know
within the will of the Dow because if I
the Dow says hey go allocate you know a
million dollars to this thing but then
they go and they they go and steal it or
take it or something like that well now
the Dow can actually fire them and
replace them uh which is which is really
cool um in my opinion and when I you
know taking the the company metaphor we
have we have Grove in here that is
really trying to to not just enable
ourselves but but many others within the
ecosystem as well so that's kind of a
quick overview of of kind of the three
main entities that said there's you know
dozens of other entities that are you
know contributing to the protocol and
individuals and this sort of thing as
well yeah let alone the the businesses
that are coming to to build on top of
pocket Network and everything like that
so that's really super cool actually uh
what's a politically correct way to
phrase this have you guys gone through
any uh transitions where you needed to
to uh effectively Leverage The Power of
The Da to oust somebody who was acting
in a negligent manner on behalf of the
foundation no uh uh thankfully I was
actually on both the foundation and I
was and obviously I'm MC of Grove um I
uh willfully and willingly uh stepped
down from that and uh we now have three
fantastic directors um Jack dermit and
and Nelson they also have their own
independent team as well so there's a
clear well now actually um between you
know for example Grove and the
foundation you know before this year
that wasn't the case but also the
foundation wasn't really active or doing
anything um uh uh so that separation as
the protocol grew as we became more
decentralized as grow started to move
into more um operating a business those
incentives were really really important
to uh to separate uh because it's very
very clear uh if those things are
intermingled it gets very complicated
ated very quickly uh so it's very
important for us to make sure that the
stewards of the protocol uh such that
the foundation actually owns a pocket
Network IP and everything around that
and the trademarks and everything around
that uh the foundation owns that um and
it's really important for them to be the
steward the kind of the the credibly
neutral Steward of of the protocol and
in many ways they have really the
hardest job because they have so many
different uh uh constituencies that they
have that they work with and uh uh
everyone um uh you know more people more
entities more more complication so which
is the nature of these things well I
mean also uh more people uh more
complications you know that's a good
thing you guys were focused on building
a protocol and now you're focused on
building a business so what was that
inflection point like when did you know
that I that now three years later after
you guys built pocket Network you were
like okay it's time to separate the
identity of of Pocket Network Inc create
growth and really you know remove
Michael from the foundation and put you
into this new role where you're looking
to onboard new businesses onboard new
teams uh as a business use case and not
necessarily uh as core developers to
build out the infrastructure yeah well
you know to be clear we we you know the
the core team is still under under
growth but uh what's really nice is that
the foundation has uh hired a PM Mato
who's who's fantastic so they're kind of
you know this kind of leads into the
foundation being the main facilitator or
the shelling Point behind the
development of a protocoling pocket um I
kind of see a future where we'll have
many entities with their own um R&D
protocol development teams uh
contributing uh uh to the protocol you
know and I think Bitcoin and ethereum
are very clear and obvious examples you
know coinbase or uh bitgo um or bit pay
forgive me um you know for example hire
you know Bitcoin protocol Engineers to
contribute uh because it does also help
uh uh their business maybe they need a
ux Improvement where some you know
important Bitcoin contribution helps you
know make things a little bit easier for
example right and I wouldn't say it was
one main inflection point I'd say it's
more of uh of consistent tension points
where you say how in your mind if you're
if you're if you're making a decision
you're like huh this is better for the
protocol for the business or vice versa
right um and and and and you know you
want to be able to just separate that as
soon as possible before it gets too
intermingled um and I think we did that
frankly at the at the perfect time um
and thankfully you've got Jack and
German and Nelson who all three of them
I've worked with for really since 2014
um in in Earnest and and there's really
no one uh who I would trust more to to
actually be operating the foundation
today uh but yeah it's just kind of you
you're making decisions and you're just
like huh this is not uh fully aligned
and what's really nice is that you know
now you know it's been an evolution it's
not an easy thing to do but uh really
the the real Harmony uh is is getting
the business incentives and what the
business is building purely and
perfectly aligned with what the
protocols incentives are and I think
that's where uh we're heading to and I
think we're we're going to be in a
really good place uh related to that
yeah that's super cool so what are kind
of the business use cases you're looking
to attract now now that your focus is on
Grove you guys have done this Rebrand
what are kind of like the next steps or
the focal areas for you over the coming
two quarters yeah um so every single
let's call it deepin protocol is or many
most of them are going to have the same
uh challenge that that pocket network
has and this is a question of um who is
building the software uh that's going to
enable as many businesses as possible to
operate on um on these networks um and
uh what I mean by that is uh you know I
used Uber as an example right now we
have you know Uber grab you know line
you name it right but these are all
independent businesses that have that
are just fully you know that that are
kind of full stack if you will rather
than using the same underlying
infrastructure across the globe right uh
and the question is you know is the
foundation going to build out the
software give it out and you know have
have it at the races or you know go our
route which is uh build out this
software open source it and enable as
many businesses as possible as easily as
possible to to build on top of pocket
right and you know the way I like to
think of is we're the first gateway but
I want to see a world with hundreds or
thousands of gateways on top of the
network uh I think that's dictated by by
scale uh by by the market in terms of
like what developers are building what's
being built I think these things are
dictated by um you know even Regional
things like if I'm in Bangalore India or
buenos itus Argentina I could build a
local Gateway for example so the
question that every single it's called a
deepin protocol is going to ask
themselves is like how much space is
there for uh how many businesses can be
can be sustained by uh this by by by the
underlying infrastructure of the
protocol
and that's really going to be dictated
by scale and the amount of economic uh
might that each one of these protocols
is is is harnessing MH and you mentioned
uh name brands like name brands that we
would recognize in our house Uber Lyft
you know these are companies that exist
and everybody knows who they are are the
kind of folks that you're starting to
work with are we migrating towards
mainstream names um collaborating with
Grove and building on top of pocket
Network or are we still dealing with
like metamask and things that crypto
natives know yeah I think um more on the
financial side yes I don't think it's
actually within it's it's it's against
Uber or airbnb's incentive to actually
look into this because it's it's to
their benefit to own the entire stack um
I think you see this with with some of
the larger kind of uh was it triaa AAA
gaming Studios with you know you know
everyone's like why are you not putting
nfts in your game so that other people
can use it because it's going to take
away from from our margins right um so I
think at least on the kind of General
Marketplace side of things it's less uh
uh less important uh uh because it's not
within their kind of incentive structure
if you will uh that said I think it's
pretty clear that some of the more
financial side uh you
know fintech these sorts of apps uh and
these sorts of businesses are definitely
looking at it in different ways I mean
look at Robin Hood I think folks like uh
you know you like Fidelity ogs in the
space looking at it for example or have
been looking at it and continue to um so
it's more on that side in my opinion
rather than on the uh let's call it the
marketplace side now there may be
someone that sees an opportunity there
and says hey let me leverage this but um
uh I I haven't uh really seen too much
of that out of out of you know outside
of like a like a Nickelodeon selling you
know creating like an nft Marketplace to
you know to to improve their brand right
but that's more of a media company right
rather than rather than a Marketplace
business
yeah this is kind of a philosophical
question um and maybe requires some
beers uh rather than coffee uh it's
still daytime here but you did mention
that like these decentralized Protocols
are essentially going to eat away at the
value ad that like a a large
conglomerate has when they Silo their
own text deck what what what does the
world look like when you
know uh let me take a step back like
banks are starting to look at at
integrating dii protocols and doing more
than just simply custody Bitcoin and
ethereum they're starting to see that
there are alternative uses for these
decentralized networks and if they don't
start building and learning how to use
them in a decade or two they might
become irrelevant so what does something
similar look like for just big name
brands that still want to own their
entire Tech stack what does that kind of
inflection point look like for our
future when when these big companies are
realizing holy crap there is actually
benefit to um Outsourcing to these
decentralized open- Source public
networks and maybe we can build on top
of this rather than fight it I think
it'll be scale and size of of the market
and as we kind of chip away at at at
their customers right um what's really
cool about um kind of the de the deepend
space is that all of us are uh kind of
getting away from this uh
self-referential uh let's call it def um
thing that happens where it's the same
money kind of moving around uh uh within
the various different you know
blockchains or defi apps or or whatever
it might be uh just to give an example
right um I was on a panel uh atar mnet a
couple weeks ago uh with the folks from
uh from demo live pier and helium and
helium launched a $5 a month um cell
phone service using their their their
hardware for example um demo has got the
plug-in thing in your car uh and it's
actually creating real tangible benefit
for non you know blockchain people in
the world right um we're in a different
position because we are um uh primarily
catering to blockchain developers but
even then we're able to offer prices or
advantages that is literally impossible
for them to offer so I think it's going
to be a slow chipping away of increasing
our market share as a as a collective
relative to where these folks are until
one day they're going to see in decide
to integrate build their own thing
whatever it might be uh to credibly
compete against it um I think as you
know collectively we uh are effectively
building an institution that creates
optionality for more users uh around the
world and and really driving more
competition for for for the world as ex
as it exists uh today awesome I love it
it goes back to what we were talking
about earlier just Supply demand um when
there's more demand for this sort of
ever Everlasting Supply that will
actually reduce costs for
large scale uh existing industry and
Enterprise that's when we really start
to see kind of these dpin networks take
off and that's something I also want to
touch base on I've been kind of a
degenerate since 2017 and uh I love when
these new kind of acronyms pop up and I
have to really admit dpen is something
that is that caught me off guard I don't
I haven't really seen much in terms of
this term being used before 202 23 so it
seems like pogy network uh helium and
these others are kind of really
pioneering in the space and kind of
giving it a name now so can you just Eli
5 what's deepin uh you gave some
examples already so we don't really need
to to dig too deeply into it but like
what is dpin um does it have to be like
a company like helium that sets up uh
these Wireless nodes that you know cell
phone users can now tap into or could it
also be something like uh like tap andgo
experiences where there are NFC readers
at a conference and you can tap your
phone uh and kind of interact with the
blockchain network what does the whole
spectrum look like yeah so I I think
Masari coined this actually and have
been have been pushing it uh which makes
sense why it was a panel but it seems to
have caught on and and um for better
Forest I think it's actually good to
have a separate you know umbrella
relative to like like defi as an example
right um and deepin is is decentralized
physical infrastructure Networks
um so if I'm building a device that
allows people to you know scan their nft
if there if it's not uh connected in
some way or somehow to a blockchain I
wouldn't consider that under under
deepend but it's a pretty broad umbrella
right you know you have pocket Network
that is incentivized people run you know
to buy servers or run bare metal
infrastructure you've got live Pier that
is uh uh doing what they're doing on on
the video side of things uh you've got
helium that's incentivizing people to to
run these these actual devices right
either in their homes or elsewhere you
know Mo's got this little physical
device that you put in your car for
example right the storage networks like
rwe filecoin storage you the name the
protocol called storage also fall under
that umbrella so I think it's a it's a
broad umbrella but I think it's nice
that it uh creates a distinction of the
type of protocol that we're that we're
building right and so how does uh poging
Network kind of fit into the whole deep
in umbrella if if it was just me taking
a glance from the outside looking in it
would just essentially be providing the
infrastructure for these different
networks to communicate with one another
yeah today it's it's just RPC I think um
uh tomorrow uh it'll be uh things like
indexing um supporting storage networks
as well um so layering on top of an R
weave or a file coin or an ipfs for
example like you can host llms you may
be able to host llms on pocket right and
incentivize people to to run these
models uh locally right for example so I
view it there there's a pretty
well-known um framework to thinking
about the internet called The OSI stack
where it's seven layers and it's
basically from the physical
infrastructure layer up to the
networking layer and everything in
between and there's dozens of protocols
in each of those seven kind of layers um
I view kind of our it's called a deepin
stack to be uh in a in a similar way
where you can kind of pick and choose
like as if you were at a you know
shopping store like I'm going to use you
know Fleek for hosting I'm going to use
file coin for my for my files I'm going
to use uh pocket for my RPC and indexing
traffic I'm going to use you know uh you
know I'm going to plug in helium for
whatever reason because that's the
business that I'm building right so
we're kind of building the core
infrastructure to allow I think the
future entrepreneurs of the world to
actually build things that were
literally impossible before right I mean
it took what the internet was in the was
uh you know aret back in the early 60s
you know it took uh 50 years to get to
Mobile which was just you know which
then changed everything right um in
terms of how we live in in our lives
today so um I think we're we're kind of
seeing the uh the puzzle pieces get put
together and enabling people to uh to
pick and choose uh what pieces they they
would like to use for whatever
interesting business that they will be
able to build in the future yeah that's
super cool I remember when I was first
getting into the crypto space in 2017
one of the things that everybody was
throwing around was we're still in the
early days this is the equivalent of the
internet in the early 90s so now that we
have the Advent of things like dpin
we're starting to see these various
different types of distributed services
that could be added to Tech stack to
like better provide for an existing
business's needs I guess kind of where
do you view we are now as an industry
with the Advent of things like dpin and
the fact that pocket network does need
to exist is crypto still in the 90s if
if we're using the internet metaphor
have we made a bunch of progress is
progress kind of slow and trudging from
your perspective uh where do we stand in
terms of web 3 Mass adoption
uh aligned with like how the internet
was adopted I would rather look at the
kind of time scale right and knowing
that over time U or each consecutive
technology that gets built um whether
it's a communication technology or
coordination technology uh uh ends up
getting to Market more quickly uh or
getting Mass adoption more quickly um so
the internet you know took 35ish years
for for kind of its Netscape moment and
we're Year we're year 13 14 into this
experiment um I'd say we're we're we're
probably five five to 10 years away at
this point from from something
meaningful that really impacts the world
I'll give an example like back in the
90s you had uh ISP providers popping up
like left and right and and I remember a
story of of another founder in this
company he was a uh a he built an ISP
provider in in Canada and he it got to
the point to where he couldn't buy
enough copper wire to support uh uh the
the the neighborhoods that needed the
the the the access to the internet right
and I don't think we've gotten there yet
uh in in our space where literally
everyone in the world is just trying to
access this thing and I don't think it's
going to be like I'm going to try to
access the blockchain I think it's going
to be some set of apps uh uh or
something that meaningfully improves our
lives in such a way where it's like holy
we've like I have to use this or
this is you know really helping me out
or whatever it might be so I still think
we're um a away from from that uh if you
you know look at it at a time scale
perspective uh but uh uh the
infrastructure that we're all building
kind of in this deep in space is is
super hypercritical for this um at the
end of day and you know if you look at
our scale as a as an industry I mean if
there's 100 to 200 billion let's call it
RPC requests just at you know talking
about Pocket land here like you know
Facebook is doing you know quadrillions
of of RPC requests right so we're still
just a a tiny tiny fraction um of of the
scale and as we get to more scale that's
going to introduce more problems that
need to get fixed right I'm a very big
believer in in Fred Wilson who's a
pretty famous investor um wrote a blog
post years ago called the app
infrastructure life cycle where kind of
the app growth drives building an
infrastructure the infrastructure is
there that allows people to build new
things which then drives the
infrastructure again um it's a really
really amazing blog post and I think you
know you kind of see it in the Cycles
within within our space right everyone's
like we have all this infr structure we
have so much block space where the where
the apps right uh as as an example where
you just see it if you're on crypto
Twitter talking talking to people in
conferences and and that sort of thing
so I think we're just kind of in a part
of the cycle and uh uh due to crypto
incentives we're actually able to I
believe compress those Cycles um more so
than than than than we might have before
yeah absolutely um it's just the thing
that I keep thinking about right now if
it's the topic of the day you know if
you're listening to this in four years
it might be something different but
friend Tech right now is kind of the
major crypto native killer app but we're
still seeing um like for instance today
I'm seeing all these forks and a lot of
people kind of getting wrecked off of uh
Corners that were cut because they were
able to get SIM swapped or the the fork
just wasn't built as well as the initial
protocol was so I guess where are we
like moving forward who do you want to
work with next do you want to work with
the frex of the world or do you want to
work with like the big mainstream big
brand names to kind of help slowly on
board and ease them into um leveraging
these decentralized protocols what's
kind of like Grove's plan of attack now
that you guys have rebranded yeah yeah
we want to um enable as many businesses
as possible um so whether that is you
know a large you know Fortune 500
company that needs to operate their own
uh gayway with with a certain type of
node for example um or that is the um
it's called the polka dot RPC provider
or uh the person who wants to build a um
a social business around a a Data
Business around like let's call it
centralized social for example or uh
gaming or or defi you name it um we're
kind of looking at everything uh either
enabling that or or directly working
with them uh ourselves and a big part of
the Rebrand obviously was just to you
know separate but also kind of elevate
the business and and and which I I'm
super happy and and excited with it I'm
I'm really happy with it um you know
very big believer in this uh a kind of
solar Punk uh kind of um uh uh meme if
you will and uh you know there's a lot
of people who are uh really spending a
lot of money and focused on on improving
you know or getting to space and and and
you know trying to exit and which I
think is important and critical but you
know we're building Grove is dependent
and built on basically a coordination
technology uh and and for me that's kind
of what it what it really highlights to
is is you know building the
infrastructure so that we can really um
all settle on these public goods while
enabling as many entrepreneurs as
possible kind of wrapping up you said
you had to end at the top of the hour um
I want to ask kind of like a a high
level question um you've been in the spa
you're you're like legit an OG now
you're 10 years into the space as an
industry do you think we've matured uh
slower or faster than you initially
would have thought of 10 years ago when
you first read the Bitcoin white paper
yeah if you asked me 10 years ago I
would have thought we would have been
you know colonizing Mars by now I was uh
way more uh optimistic about the pace of
things I think the the tourism what is
it um something I'm paraphrasing here
but but things don't move fast until
they do there's some phrase there but um
I think there's we're realizing how much
hard work there is um and where we're
seeing the friction points in in the
real world uh with with policy with
actually building useful things for
people rather than you know and these
are just hard problems that just take
really smart people and a lot of time to
build um but once the things get put
together I think then uh we'll see uh an
incredible inflection point um I think
similar to what we're seeing with with
AI for example um and that's been around
for you know much longer you know people
have been trying that you know trying to
figure that out for much longer than
than than than crypto has at this point
right so for me it's it's these next
five to 10 years that are going to be
just incredibly exciting and and um you
know part it's it's just so interesting
being you know in this moment in time
because there's a there's a lot of
cynicism uh uh in the space and you know
people are like you know you're not
really at the bottom unless people are
existentially questioning like why
they're here uh in many ways and and you
see that all over in crypto in Twitter
and in person and uh you know I I really
do believe things aren't as bad or as
good as they think as they seem um and
at the end of the day if you look at um
kind of the fundamentals and and
everyone is there's just just incredible
amount of incredibly smart smart people
here that are that are just building
great technology and I think there's
going to be plenty of people that can
find uh that can understand it and be
able to put it together in a way that
really drives um uh the future that
we're all trying to build here yeah for
the Builders out there um there's no
better time to build than during a bear
uh it is a lot easier to focus there's a
lot less chatter going around the water
cooler and there's a lot less noise so I
guess
uh wrapping up if somebody wants to get
in contact with you to build with Grove
um or I guess also if somebody's
interested in learning more about the
dowo because it sounds like there are
two different kind of roles that the
listener might be able to have what's
the best way for folks to get in contact
with you to learn about uh the services
that Grove can help provide a company
and what's the best way that maybe a
listener or a pocket hodler can
participate in the Dow yeah I would join
uh the the pocket uh pocket Network
Discord um and also the poopus den um
which is the telegram chat there uh
related there's a ton of great people
there that are really able to to answer
any questions um and on the Grove side
um you can definitely ping me on Twitter
it's my last name just with an
underscore instead of an apostrophe at
oror so um but uh also if you want to
keep up with uh just what's happening in
Pocket land uh i' I'd recommend uh
pocked new news uh we don't know who
they are uh it's we think it's just a
amalgamation of people but you know
these folks uh uh really keep up uh uh
they really do a good job of of um
amplifying everything that's happening
in the ecosystem and it's it's quite
incredible to see awesome Michael it was
great to chat with you for an hour I was
really excited to to dig in and and kind
of get a little nerdy and uh you
exceeded my expectations so thank you so
much for for sharing um this time to
talking about the cool things that
you're working on and to share your
insights um it was really awesome thanks
Don it was a pleasure and it was awesome
talking to you
cheers